18th of April 2026, Halvar Flake, Berlin (The FX memorial weekend)

It feels decidedly weird to write the second obituary for a close friend and
fellow data traveller in 6 months.

Describing who Fx was is not easy. Now that I have to find words, I would say
he was a friend, a one-time business partner, a collaborator, a party animal,
networker extraordinaire, a complex and complicated personality, rock'n'roller,
one of the few people that could span the networking (packets), networking
(people) and the vuln-dev divide with sufficient depth in all three of them,
and the source of legendarily hilarious stories that should probably not be
told  (although I will tell a subset of them here, against better judgement).

Fx was a man of contradictions who could oscillate from severely underestimating
his own substantial intelligence and intuition one day to absolute megalomania
the next; he was dismissive of society's conventions even by the low standards
of our community while also in awe of academic titles. If there is one thing
that he was at all times: Very much unfiltered, and brutally honest with others
(if not always with himself).

My memories of Fx will render him justice by describing him as I knew him, good
and bad, as I don't think he would've wanted to be posthumously airbrushed
into smoothness. I miss him, and I will continue missing him for the rest of
my life.

I met Fx in the most unlikely place: In New Orleans, prior to Hurricane
Katrina, at the first "Blackhat Windows" event - in some sense the precursor
to Bluehat. We met during the conference and talked briefly, but we only truly
met in the evening. Due to some bizarre accident, Fx had met two other East
Germans (of which he seemingly knew one from school?), and I ended up with
this group of East Germans, a bunch of US military folks, and a group of
Microsoft employees in a somewhat rowdy Karaoke place. And somehow me and the
East Germans were signed up to perform Karaoke on stage, in front of a large
group of drunk people. I was asked what song - and picked a random Beatles
song that I assumed everybody knows, "Come Together".

On stage, it turned out that of the 4 people I was the only one that had ever
heard the song, or knew any of the lyrics.

Fx and I somehow clicked, and it is a bit hazy for me how our friendship
deepened. But he had a networking and corporate Telco background, knew a lot
about networks that I will never know, and in turn was very interested in
learning more about reverse engineering. So we swapped what we knew - I had
been purely writing exploits for Windows machines until then, and it was Fx
that made me load random router Firmwares into IDA for the first time.

We talked on the phone frequently. He had Cisco memory corruptions but struggled
with exploiting them reliably, I had no inkling of the internals of Cisco
devices but a bit more experience with memory corruptions.

He worked for a consultancy called n.runs, and having to make ends meet as a
university student I would subcontract for them. This is how I somehow ended
up in Redmond, on a team with Fx and others, auditing Windows Mobile source
code.

I do recall Fx having an eye infection, and refusing to go slow with the
cigarettes, having to wear an eyepatch for the entirety of the gig. It was
on his security badge photo, and he would take frequent smoking breaks in front
of the building. I'd join him, sometimes to smoke (I still occasionally did
so at the time), sometimes to drink Yerba Mate - passing through the hallways
at Microsoft at a time when posters with Steve Ballmer reminding employees
"there is always a way to save money" were plastered all over and a look at
the MSFT org chart would be the equivalent of looking at the Game of Thrones
map.

Fx as a code auditor was an interesting experience. Similarly to me at the time,
he had a very hard time sitting still, so he constantly wiggled and bounced his
legs while reading the code. Contrary to me, he wanted company while auditing.
In some sense, he needed someone to entertain him and keep him
engaged while auditing, a partner to discuss with. His approach was a form of
constant narrative dialogue with his co-worker. It was very different in
approach from what I was used to, as I often needed extreme silence to focus,
to the point where a bird chirping outside would disturb me.

I recall a hungover morning at the Helsinki Airport when we sat in a coffee 
shop that was named "Brutal Cafe" for some reason, and we both
thought the name was hilarious. I wanted to have a shirt with the logo,
and Fx asked the waitress if they sell shirts, but in some misunderstanding the
waitress misinterpreted our question and thought we wanted to buy *her* shirt;
I still feel bad for that misunderstanding (which might've felt like harassment
to her).

Fx was often unhappy with his employer, and I encouraged him a few times to
strike out on his own. Out of instinct (and facilitated by low living costs)
I had guarded my independence, and I felt Fx would do more than fine on his
own feet. Eventually, I had started a company based on BinDiff, and as part of
the company philosophy we'd sell the tool but also do select consulting gigs
that were hand-picked to force us to *use* the tool to be on the hook for
improving it. I was fiercely determined to not become a consulting company, so
managing our "select consulting" funnel became a real challenge -- in
consulting, you always have either too little or too much work.

So somehow a glut of patch-analysis reverse engineering gigs accumulated, and
as Fx's unhappiness with his employer reached new levels, I encouraged him and
told him: Listen, we have spillover work, and I would *love* to hand it to you.
If you strike out by yourself now, here's regular recurring work for the next
N months, enough to pay your bills but not enough to saturate your bandwidth.
Use that and let's go.

In this way, Fx started SABRE Labs, the consulting "sister" company to SABRE
Security. There were no legal agreements between the two companies, and no
actual legal ties -- SABRE Security was owned by me, SABRE Labs by Fx, and
aside from an informal agreement to share branding and some work, we had no
deeper official ties.

The sharing of branding ended a few years later - SABRE Travel Networks sent a
very threatening letter to Fx with regards to trademark violations. They owned
a trademark for "delivery of services over a network" for SABRE, and there
was no use in fighting it. This is when Fx rebranded SABRE Labs to Recurity
Labs. I received the trademark letter a few months later, and SABRE Security
got rebranded to zynamics.

By this point, Recurity was a healthy and growing security consulting company,
zynamics had a product portfolio and a loyal customer base for its products.

The early-to-mid 2000s were a strange time in Europe, and both Fx and I had
had a lot of exposure to the cyber organisations of the Anglosphere, which
seems to have made us suspicious in the eyes of some local folks.

When I moved into my apartment in Bochum in 2004, it was empty but for a
mattress and internet for the first few weeks. One day, my doorbell rang and
two men introduced themselves as coming from city hall with the request of
measuring the sound absorption of my walls, because a coffee shop was supposed
to be started one story below my flat and they wanted to be sure all was up to
regulatory standards. I allowed them in, they brought a bunch of equipment
(hexagonal antennas etc.) and asked me to step out. I walked across the street
into a cafe, and heard a lot of noise emanating from my flat. I came back,
they thanked me and left. The next week, I put furniture into my flat - a bed,
wardrobes etc. - and a week or so later, the city hall guys show up again,
telling me they lost their data and they have to measure again.

After they left from their second measurement, I called Fx. Upon telling the
story, he took a deep breath, paused, and then said: "Halvar -- have you
considered that if they are measuring sound absorption levels
from the cafe, they would've put the sound source in the cafe?". I will never
forget that moment.

It was at an event that Fx put on in Berlin as part of SABRE Labs that I first
saw Sergey Bratus use the term "weird machine", and it clicked with me at a
very deep level. Fx always encouraged me to pursue writing my thoughts down,
and discuss more with Sergey, and this encouragement was very helpful in writing
what I consider my best paper and the pride of my career many years later.

In the same way Fx needed people to talk to while auditing code, he was much
more of a community person than I will ever be. He was most comfortable when
there were *many* people around him, and the events that the Phenoelit and 
PH-Neutral folks put on with Fx were stellar. There were many people around
Fx that were more quiet but that put in a lot of work into making everything
run smoothly. They put up with his mood swings, and formed what was essentially
his extended family.

At some later point in the 2000s, we got some specialized consulting gigs with
some local folks. These folks were rooted in ancient and somewhat arcane HUMINT
tradecraft. These clients showed up, and it felt like they had stepped out of
a time machine. For various historical administrative reasons they had
difficulty doing wire transfers and tried paying large sums for trainings or
consulting in cash, and had all sorts of other quirks that I found bewildering.

I am sure they found Fx and I as bewildering as well, and an unlikely couple.
We got some books as a thank-you gift at one point, and they gifted Fx the
autobiography of Keith Richards.

In 2009, under some bizarre circumstances, I got my drink spiked at a bar in 
Paris on my way back from a vacation in which my car had been burgled. These
were strange and paranoid times - Julian Assange had spent several hours at the
zynamics tent during the Hacking At Random event in August, and a lot of weird
stuff was happening.

In an unlikely twist of fate I had left the bar where I consumed the spiked
drink right after finishing it, and somehow wandered back into my hotel, even
though I had to climb the stairs on all fours. The night was spent hallucinating
and with various other intoxication effects. When the fog cleared the next day,
I called Fx - who self-described as "polytoxicophile" - and described what had
happened, and he helped me narrow down the set of substances that I might have
been exposed to.

The last big professional project Fx and I did together was the analysis of
Stuxnet when it was first discovered. A strange gig if there ever had been one,
involving great power intrigue and clients that got into political fights as
the project moved on, causing all sorts of head- and heartache. We benefited
greatly from the fact that Fx had been exposed to PLC programming as part of
his technical education in the GDR. While our team focused on the non-PLC parts,
Fx reverse-engineered a PLC disassembler by reverse engineering the PLC
development environment. I remember my astonishment when I found out other
teams that were reversing Stuxnet had simply asked on a Russian forum until
someone gave them a PLC disassembler.

I discussed with Fx a bit before we sold to Google, but our professional
cooperation ceased at that point, and we lost touch to a certain extent. The
next time I really spent significant time with him was when he came to my
wedding in May 2016. He was in bad shape, clearly in the grip of his demons.
I was quite worried about him, and travelled to Berlin shortly thereafter to
have a long walk and talk with him in the woods. I tried to get him to seek
help and try to get away from his demons - but I did not succeed. In many 
humans, addiction to an unhealthy behavior is driven by a deep sense of fear
or insecurity. The addiction is there to distract or protect from the bigger
demon, and asking someone to drop their shield and face the bigger demon is
often a fool's errand.

Fx - with all his accomplishments, all the technical excellence, and all his
social connections - was deeply insecure about himself. And in this
conversation, he was convinced that he needed alcohol to be cool and
stimulants to perform, in order to be "as good as the others". He measured 
himself against other people, and set himself impossible standards (something I
know too well). The substances would silence the self-doubt, and - no matter how
much I told him that in my view he was at his best when he abstained - he could
not accept that view.

I left that conversation a bit heartbroken - a person you know reacts as if
they are possessed by something else - and it took me a good decade to understand
that I asked him to do something that is impossible for most people: Drop the
shield and face the fear.

Over time, I came to understand that in the period from 2011 to 2015 Fx had 
increasingly put strain on his personal relationships. He had always been 
exceedingly nice and respectful with me, but I had observed that he could be
impatient with the people closest to him. This tendency seems to have worsened
during these years, and led to some friends distancing themselves.

A few weeks later, he was hospitalized with his first major brain hemorrhage 
that he narrowly survived after many surgeries and complications. We stayed in 
contact, and I wrote with him and did occasional phone calls. I visited him a
few times. Our relationship was never quite the same - I was very happy he had
survived, and I was happy to try to help him when I could, and I rooted for him
all the time. We remained friends, but a part of him had left, and only flashes
and glimpses of it remained.

Through this period, I got to meet his mother, a force of nature and clearly the
source of Fx's intellect. I can only admire the strength and fortitude she
showed through all of this.

And now he is gone. Like a wave that crashed onto the beach, there is no trace
of his direct presence - but he moved the (thinking) sand, and rearranged it,
and that trace will have forever altered the trajectory of events. Since we
can never see the alternative, it will become harder and harder how the world
would've looked without him over time, until we believe that the current path
is the only possible path. It isn't.

I miss him, and will keep missing him.

